The BioDirectory Registry is a simple system for specifying where to
find services which provide sequence databases.  This system allows
you to create a single site-wide configuration file that tells BioPerl
applications how to access sequence databases.  You can start out by
accessing sequence data over the web, and later install a locally
mirrored copy of GenBank.  By changing one line site-wide
configuration file, all BioPerl applications will start using the
mirrored local copy without making any source code changes.

INSTALLING THE REGISTRY FILE

The registry file should be named seqdatabase.ini.  It should be
installed in one of the following locations:

   $HOME/.bioinformatics/seqdatabase.ini
   /etc/bioinformatics/seqdatabase.ini

If a local registry file cannot be found, BioPerl will take its
defaults from this URL:

   http://www.open-bio.org/registry/seqdatabase.ini

You may add a web-based registry file of your own by manipulating the
Bio::DB::Registry module.

FORMAT OF THE REGISTRY FILE

  The file is a simple stanza format which goes

  [database-name]
  tag=value
  tag=value

  [database-name]
  tag=value
  tag=value

where each stanza starts with the declaration of the database being in square 
brackets and following that one line tag=value tag value formats.

Database-name stanzas can be repeated, in which case the client should
try each service in turn (starting at the first one).

The options under each stanza must have two non-optional tag=value lines being

  protocol=<protocol-type>
  location=<location-string>

The Protocol Tag
----------------

protocol currently can be one of

  flat-index
  flat-binary
  biofetch
  bsane-corba
  biosql
  xembl

"flat-index" is used to fetch sequences from local flat files that
have been indexed using BerkeleyDB.  It corresponds to the
Bio::DB::Flat::BDB module.

"flat-binary" is used to fetch sequences from local flat files that
use a binary indexing scheme.  It corresponds to the
Bio::DB::Flat::Binary module.

"

The Location Tag
----------------

location is a string specific to the protocol. Any number of
additional tag values are allowed in the stanza which should be passed
to the appropiate constructor of the protocol to interpret. Some
protocols will insist on other mandatory tags



Database Formats:

urn:lsid:open-bio.org:dbformat:<format>/<alphabet>

where <format> is one of:
      embl
      genbank
      fasta
      swis
      pdb

and <format> is one of:
    dna
    protein

For purposes of backward compatibility, can abbreviate to "embl/dna"
or just "embl".

